---
layout: post
title:  "Software Terminologies"
date:   2016-05-29 19:20:28 +0530
categories: software
tagline: Keep'em Handy
comments: true
---

<em class="ddl">Deliverables and Milestones</em>


<span class="ddl strong">Deliverables</span> A tangible or intangible object produced as a result of the project that is intended to be delivered to a customer. These are generated during software development. Examples of different deliverables are <span class="udl">source code, user manuals, operating procedure, manuals etc</span>.


<span class="ddl">Milestones</span> Events that are used to ascertain the status of the project.
Examples of milestones,  <span class="udl">Finalization of project, Completion of design documentation</span>.
<hr>


<em class="ddl">Measures and Metrics</em>


<span class="ddl">Measures</span> A measure provides a quantitative indication of the extent, dimension, size, capacity, efficiency, productivity or reliability of some attributes of a product or process

<span class="ddl">Measurement</span> Measurement is the act of evaluating a measure.


<span class="ddl">Metrics</span> A metric is a quantitative measure of the degree to which a system, component or process possesses a given attribute.
<hr>


<em class="ddl">Product and Process</em>


<span class="ddl">Product</span> What is delivered to the customer, is called a <span class="udl">product</span>. It may include source code, specification document, manuals, documentation etc and basically, it is nothing but <span class="udl">a set of deliverables</span> only.

<span class="ddl">Process</span> Process is the way in which we produce software. It is the <span class="udl">collection of activities that leads to (a part of) a product</span>. An efficient process is required to produce good quality products.
<hr>


<em class="ddl">Product and Process Metrics</em>


<span class="ddl">Product Metrics</span> They are the measures for the software products, example,
<span class="udl">Size, Reliability, Complexity</span>.


<span class="ddl">Process Metrics</span> They quantify the attributes of software development process and environment, example, <span class="udl">Productivity, Quality, Efficiency</span>.
<hr>


<em class="ddl">Productivity</em>


<span class="ddl">Productivity</span> It is the rate of O/P per unit effort.
<hr>

<em class="ddl">Module and Component</em>


<span class="ddl">Module</span> Independently deliverable piece of functionality providing access to its services (methods - in case of Classes [OOP]) through interfaces with or without any encapsulation.



<span class="ddl">Component</span> They are also called elements. They are the elements of a executing system and together compose a larger system. So they are different from module in a way that they are defined at software system level whereas module are defined at programming language level.
<hr>


<em class="ddl">Generic and Customized Products</em>


<span class="ddl">Generic Products</span> Generic products are developed for anonymous customers. The target is generally the entire world and many copies are expected to be sold. Infrastructure software like operating system, compilers, analyzers, word processors, CASE tools etc.



<span class="ddl">Customized Products</span> The customized products are developed for particular customers. The specific product is designed and developed as per customer requirements. Most of the development projects (say about 80%)come under this category
<hr>
